>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SUNDAY JULY 27...
ISRAEL RESUMES ITS ATTACKS IN
GAZA AFTER HAMAS REJECTS A
CEASEFIRE.
HAMAS LATER OFFERS ITS OWN
TEMPORARY TRUCE.
FIGHTING INTENSIFIES IN EASTERN
UKRAINE, AS THOUSANDS OF RUSSIAN
TROOPS MASS ALONG THE BORDER.
AND IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT, A
TINY PACIFIC ISLAND TAKES ON THE
WORLD, CLOSING OFF A HUGE AREA
OF THE OCEAN TO TRY TO PREVENT
OVERFISHING.
NEXT ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
>>FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS
IN LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING,
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
INTERNATIONAL EFFORTS TO CREATE
A LASTING CEASEFIRE BETWEEN
ISRAEL AND HAMAS APPEAR TO HAVE
AT LEAST TEMPORARILY BROKEN
DOWN.
THERE WAS MORE ISRAELI SHELLING
OF GAZA AND NEW HAMAS ROCKET
FIRE INTO ISRAEL TODAY.
YESTERDAY, HAMAS REJECTED AN
ISRAELI OFFER TO EXTEND A 12-
HOUR CEASEFIRE.
AND ALMOST IMMEDIATELY, HAMAS
FIRED MORE ROCKETS INTO ISRAEL.
TODAY, ON THE EVE OF EID, THE
MUSLIM FEAST MARKING THE END OF
FASTING DURING RAMADAN, HAMAS
REVERSED COURSE AND OFFERED A
CEASEFIRE.
>> IN RESPONSE TO THE ASSESSMENT
OF THE UNITED NATIONS AND TAKING
INTO CONSIDERATION THE CONDITION
OF OUR PEOPLE IN GAZA,
ESPECIALLY IN LIGHT OF THE
COMING EID HOLIDAY, THERE WERE
DISCUSSIONS BETWEEN THE FACTIONS
AND THEY HAVE REACHED AN
AGREEMENT TO ACCEPT THE OFFER OF
A 24-HOUR HUMANITARIAN CALM.
>> Sreenivasan: BUT ISRAEL TODAY
RENEWED ITS ATTACKS ON HAMAS
TARGETS IN GAZA.
PRIME MINISTER BENJAMIN
NETANYAHU APPEARED ON CNN'S
STATE OF THE UNION WITH CANDY
CROWLEY.
>> YOU SAY ISRAEL RESUMED ITS
OFFENSIVE.
NO, ISRAEL DIDN'T RESUME OUR
OFFENSIVE, WE HAD A CEASEFIRE,
THEY VIOLATED IT, AND NOW
THEY'RE VIOLATING THEIR OWN
CEASEFIRE AND OBVIOUSLY WE'LL
TAKE WHATEVER ACTION IS
NECESSARY TO PROTECT OUR PEOPLE,
INCLUDING AGAINST THE TERRORIST
TUNNELS THAT THEY'RE TRYING TO
DIG AGAINST US.
HAMAS IS SIMPLY CONTINUING ALL
ITS OPERATIONS AND ISRAEL WILL
NOT LET THIS TERROR OPERATION
DECIDE WHEN IT'S CONVENIENT FOR
THEM AND NOT CONVENIENT FOR THEM
TO ATTACK OUR PEOPLE, WHEN IT'S
CONVENIENT FOR THEM TO RESTOCK
AND RELOAD, AND WHEN IT'S NOT
CONVENIENT FOR THEM.
FOR MORE WE ARE JOINED BY
SKYPE BY RUTH EGLASH OF THE
WASHINGTON POST.
SO WHAT'S THE LATEST?
>> IT'S BEEN A VERY UP AND
DOWN DAY.
I MEAN THIS MORNING THERE
WAS A CEASEFIRE AND IT WAS
HOLDING FOR A LITTLE BIT,
EVEN THOUGH THERE WAS STILL
ROCKET FIRE COMING IT FROM
GAZA INTO ISRAEL.
THE ISRAELI GOVERNMENT HAD
ORDERED THE MILITARY NOT TO
RESPOND UP UNTIL MIDMORNING.
AND AT THAT POINT THE
ROCKETS JUST KEPT ONCOMING.
AND THE GOVERNMENT DECIDED
TO INSTRUCT THE MILITARY TO
CONTINUE ON POUNDING GAZA
WITH ITS AIR STRIKES AND
FROM THE SEA, AND ALSO TO
CONTINUE SEARCHING AND
DESTROYING TUNNELS THAT HAVE
BEEN DISCOVERED UNDER THE
GROUND BETWEEN ISRAEL AND GAZA.
AT AROUND 2:00 TODAY THERE
WAS SOME WORDS THAT HAMAS
WAS SEEKING A CEASEFIRE,
AND THAT PROPOSAL BY HAMAS
WAS REJECTED BY ISRAEL.
AND THEN OVERALL THE
CEASEFIRE ATTEMPTS BY THE
U.S. SECRETARY OF STATE JOHN
KERRY HAS BEEN AS FAR AS I
KNOW REJECTED, FLATLY
REJECTED BY THE ISRAELI
GOVERNMENT.
>> WE'VE ALSO HEARD THAT
THERE HAVE BEEN ATTEMPTS AT
INFILTRATION ALONG THE
BORDER WITH GAZA.
>> THAT'S BEEN AN ONGOING
FOR THE LAST THREE WEEKS.
THERE HAVE BEEN PRETTY MUCH
EVERY FEW DAYS INFILTRATION
ATTEMPTS, SOLDIERS
DISCOVERING TUNNELS INSIDE
THE GAZA STRIP AND MILITANTS
MANAGING TO GO THROUGH THOSE
TUNNELS AND COME OUT INTO
ISRAEL.
THAT'S BEEN PRETTY MUCH
CONSTANT FOR THE LAST THREE
WEEKS.
>> WE'VE ALSO HEARD THAT
THERE WAS AN ATTEMPTED
INFILTRATION INTO ISRAEL
FROM THE WEST BANK TODAY.
>> YES, I RECEIVED AROUND
MIDDAY AN UPDATE FROM THE
ARMY THAT SAID A CO-OP
CARRYING EXPLOSIVES HAD BEEN
STOPPED AT A CHECK POINT
NEAR JERUSALEM.
THE SUSPECT WAS APPREHENDED
AND THE CAR WAS TAKEN IN FOR
FURTHER INVESTIGATION.
I DIDN'T HAVE ANY MORE
DETAILS ON THAT AT THIS TIME
BUT THERE HAS BEEN QUITE A
NUMBER OF-- QUITE A LARGE
AMOUNT OF PROTESTS IN THE
WEST BANK OVER THE LAST FEW
DAYS.
AND AT LEAST NINE PALESTINIANS
KILLED DURING CLASHES WITH THE
ISRAELI SECURITY FORCES IN THE
WEST BANK.
>> YOU KNOW, WE'VE SEEN A
COUPLE OF CLIPS AND IMAGES
AND VIDEOS OF PEACE RALLIES
IN CITIES LIKE TEL AVIV.
IS THIS GAINING ANY ATTRACTION,
THE SOCIAL MEDIA CAMPAIGNS AS
WELL?
>> YEAH, YOU KNOW, THESE
HAVE BEEN HAPPENING SINCE
THE BEGINNING.
THERE WAS ALWAYS A SMALL
NUMBER OF PEOPLE IN ISRAEL
WHO WERE SPEAKING OUT
AGAINST THE WAR SAYING THAT
IT WASN'T GOING TO ACHIEVE
ANYTHING.
LAST NIGHT POSSIBLY WAS THE
BIGGEST RALLY IN TEL AVIV,
ROUGHLY 3,000 PEOPLE ATTENDED.
AND THAT RALLY WAS CUT SHORT
WHEN HAMAS FIRED ROCKETS
TOWARDS TEL AVIV AND THE
SIRENS WENT OFF IN TEL AVIV,
FORCING PEOPLE TO GO INTO
BOMB SHELTERS.
BUT THERE IS A CONSISTENT
VOICE HERE, BUT IT'S VERY,
VERY SMALL.
>> RUTH EGLASH OF THE
"WASHINGTON POST" JOINING US
VIA SKYPE FROM JERUSALEM
THIS EVENING, THANKS SO MUCH.
>> YOU'RE WELCOME.
>> FOR MORE ABOUT THE
SITUATION ON THE GROUND IN
GAZA WE ARE JOINED ONCE
AGAIN TONIGHT VIA SKYPE BY
NICHOLAS CASEY OF "THE WALL
STREET JOURNAL."
SO WE'VE HEARD BASICALLY THAT
ALL SIGNS OF THE TRUCE ARE OFF.
THAT THERE IS CONTINUED ROCKET
BEING HURLED AT ISRAEL FROM
HAMAS, AND THAT THE SHELLING
CONTINUES FROM ISRAEL ON GAZA.
>> BASICALLY THAT'S WHAT IS
HAPPENING, UNFORTUNATELY.
I SAW JUST RIGHT OUTSIDE MY
HOTEL WINDOW THREE ROCKETS
FROM HAMAS OR ONE OF THE
AFFILIATED GROUPS GOING OUT
TOWARDS ISRAEL.
AND MOST OF THEM WARNING, WE
WERE GETTING BOMBARDED
HEAVILY RIGHT AROUND THE HOTEL.
WE HAVE NO IDEA WHAT THE
ISRAELIS WERE TRYING TO
HIT BUT THEY WERE TRYING TO HIT
IT MULTIPLE TIMES.
THE SOUNDS OF THE BOOMS WERE
SO LOUD THAT IT WAS SHAKING
THE WINDOWS, SCARING
EVERYBODY OUT OF THE ROOMS.
AND I HAVE NO IDEA WHAT THE
SITUATION WAS LIKE JUST A
COUPLE OF BLOCKS AWAY WHERE
THESE TARGETS WERE GETTING
HIT.
>> THERE SEEM TO BE
DIFFERENT MOTIVATIONS FOR
BOTH SIDES ON WHETHER TO
AGREE TO A CEASEFIRE OR NOT.
>> THERE ARE.
I THINK AGREEING TO THESE
TEMPORARY CEASEFIRES IS
MOST WITHIN ISRAEL'S
INTEREST BECAUSE WHEN THE
FIRING STOPPED, ISRAEL
GENERALLY CONTINUES TO GO
AFTER THE HAMAS TUNNELS AND
HAVE ITS TROOPS STILL
STATIONED WITHIN THE GAZA
STRIP WITH A PROMISE FROM
HAMAS THAT HAMAS WON'T
ATTACK IT.
AS FOR HAMAS, ITS
INFRASTRUCTURE, ITS WEAPONS
FACILITIES AND ITS TUNNELS
CONTINUE TO BE DESTROYED BY
ISRAEL AS THE PEOPLE OF GAZA
GET A SMALL BRIEF BREAK TO
GET SOME WATER.
WHEREAS THE TROOPS FROM
ISRAEL REMAIN IN THE GAZA
STRIP AND IS UNABLE TO
ATTACK THEM BY ITS OWN
AGREEMENT.
>> WE ALSO RECEIVED
INFORMATION TODAY ABOUT A
RED CROSS BUILDING THAT WAS
DAMAGED.
WHAT HAPPENED THERE?
>> THERE WAS A RED CROSS
BUILDING SOUTH OF HERE THAT
WAS TORCHED.
IT'S NOT CLEAR WHY PEOPLE
CAME AFTER THE RED CROSS
BUILDING.
BUT THE FACT IS, WHAT'S
GOING ON IN GAZA NOW IS THAT
THERE'S A FOREIGN ARMY WHO'S
ATTACKING IT.
THERE ARE A LOT OF FOREIGNERS
HERE WHO ARE TRYING TO
PHOTOGRAPH, DOCUMENT AND
ALSO HELP GAZANS.
AND THERE'S A TREMENDOUS
FEELING OF FRUSTRATION AND
ENTRAPMENT HERE.
THE OTHER THING THAT HAD
GONE ON WAS THAT THERE WAS A
BIT OF ANGER TOWARDS THE RED
CROSS BASED ON SOME RUMORS
THAT HAD GONE AROUND BEFORE
THE EVACUATION OR THE
ATTEMPTED EVACUATION OF A
U.N. SHELTER IN THE NORTH OF
HERE.
I DON'T KNOW IF THIS HAD
ANYTHING TO DO WITH IT.
BUT WHAT HAD HAPPENED WAS
THAT THERE WAS A RUMOR GOING
AROUND THAT THERE WERE RED
CROSS VEHICLES THAT WERE
GOING TO GET PEOPLE OUT OF
THE SHELTER.
THEN AS PEOPLE WERE
GATHERING, THERE WAS AN
ATTACK ON THE SHELTER THAT
KILLED 16 PEOPLE.
ONE OF THE DAYS THAT I WAS
IN THE HOSPITAL WHERE THESE
PEOPLE WERE BEING TREATED,
THERE WERE PEOPLE YELLING AT
THE RED CROSS SAYING WHY
DIDN'T YOU COME TO RESCUE US.
AND THE DRIVER FROM THE RED
CROSS WAS TRYING TO EXPLAIN
THAT HE HIMSELF COULDN'T GET
INTO THE AREA BECAUSE IT WAS
TOO DANGEROUS THAT DAY.
>> ALL RIGHT, NICHOLAS CASEY
OF "THE WALL STREET JOURNAL"
JOINING US VIA SKYPE FROM
GAZA, THANKS SO MUCH.
>> THANKS.
>> Sreenivasan: AND NOW TO
ANOTHER MAJOR CONFLICT ZONE:
UKRAINE.
TODAY, DEPUTY NATIONAL SECURITY
ADVISOR BEN RHODES SAID THE
OBAMA ADMINISTRATION IS
EXPLORING NEW WAYS TO HELP THE
UKRAINIAN GOVERNMENT SUPPRESS
PRO-RUSSIAN SEPARATISTS.
>> WE'VE INITIATED A DISCUSSION
WITH THEM, WHAT A LONG TERM
TRAINING AND EQUIPPING
RELATIONSHIP WOULD BE WITH
UKRAINE SO THAT THEY HAVE MORE
MODERNIZED AND PROFESSIONALIZED
SECURITY FORCES SO THAT THEY CAN
PROVIDE FOR SECURITY IN THE
COUNTRY.
AND WE'RE ALSO VERY FOCUSED ON
WHAT WE CAN DO TO HELP THEM
SECURE THAT BORDER.
WE HAVEN'T MADE THE DECISION TO
PROVIDE CERTAIN TYPES OF
WEAPONS, BUT INTELLIGENCE, WE DO
PROVIDE INTELLIGENCE AND WE'VE
REVIEWED THAT.
WE STILL THINK THE BEST THING
THAT THE UNITED STATES CAN DO IS
SEND A MESSAGE TO RUSSIA THROUGH
VERY STRONG SANCTIONS,
COORDINATED WITH THE EUROPEANS.
>> Sreenivasan: THIS AS FIGHTING
BETWEEN UKRAINIAN GOVERNMENT
FORCES AND PRO-RUSSIAN
SEPARATISTS HAS INTENSIFIED IN
RECENT DAYS-- THAT'S DELAYED
INTERNATIONAL INVESTIGATORS
TRYING TO REACH THE SITE OF THE
MALAYSIAN JETLINER THAT WENT
DOWN IN EASTERN UKRAINE WITH 298
PEOPLE ON BOARD.
OUR REPORT BY ITN IS NARRATED BY
JANE DODGE.
>> THIS GRAINY AMATEUR FOOTAGE
WAS REPORTEDLY FILMED IN THE
REGION TODAY HEADING WESTWARD
INCLUDING LORRY LOADS OF TROOPS
BELIEVE TO BE PRO RUSSIANS,
ROCKET LAUNCHERS AND HEAVY
ARTILLERY.
THE MILITARY HARDWARE A
POSSIBLE RESPONSE TO THE
UKRAINIAN GOVERNMENT'S
INTENSIFYING HOSTILITIES.
IT HAS BEEN TRYING TO REGAIN
CONTROL OF REBEL HELD TOWNS
THIS WEEKEND AND SECURE THE
CRASH SITE OF FLIGHT MH-17.
THAT EXPLAINS WHY A TEAM OF
INTERNATIONAL POLICE OFFICERS
ONCE AGAIN DELAYED VISITING THE
WRECKAGE.
THE BODIES OF EIGHT PASSENGERS
ARE STILL MISSING.
>> WE WILL NOT RISK OUR UNARMED
CIVILIAN OBSERVER MISSION TO
DEPLOY TO A SITE WHERE WE CAN'T
CONTROL THE RISKS.
>> Reporter: FLIGHT MH-17
CRASHED IN REBEL HELD TERRITORY
78 KILOMETERS FROM DONETSK.
TWO TOWNS TO THE NORTHWEST ARE
TWO TOWNS THE UKRAINIANS ARE
TRYING TO REGAIN OF CONTROL OF.
THE UKRAINIAN PRESIDENT WAS
DRESSED FOR WAR YESTERDAY AS HE
VISITED HIS TROOPS.
THE THE BIG PRIZE TO SECURE
IS REBEL CONTROLLED DONETSK,
HOME TO MORE THAN A MILLION
PEOPLE, NOW ALMOST COMPLETELY
SURROUNDED BY GOVERNMENT TROOPS.
>> AS WE WERE LEAVING DONETSK
WE SAW A LARGE CONVOY OF
MILITARY HARDWARE AND TROOPS OF
THE UKRAINIAN GOVERNMENT WHICH
WAS HEADED TOWARDS DONETSK.
I THINK THERE WERE AROUND 40,
50 LARGE VEHICLES, MANY OF THEM
CARRYING TANKS.
SO I THINK WHAT IS HAPPENING IS
THAT THE UKRAINIAN GOVERNMENT
IS USING THE MOMENTUM THAT WAS
CREATED AFTER THE CRASH OF THE
MALAYSIAN AIRLINES TO STEP
UP THEIR CRACKDOWN ON THE
SEPARATISTS' REBELLION.
>> Reporter: VLADIMIR PUTIN
WAS HONORING RUSSIA'S MILITARY
PAST TODAY.
HE'S REPEATEDLY DENIED ARMING
UKRAINE'S REBELS BUT THE U.S.
STATE DEPARTMENT HAS RELEASED
SATELLITE IMAGES WHICH THEY SAY
SHOW RUSSIAN FORCES FIRING
ACROSS THE BORDER AT UKRAINE
TROOPS LAST WEEK.
>> Sreenivasan: FROM AFGHANISTAN
TONIGHT, WORD OF TALIBAN GAINS
IN WHAT ARE DESCRIBED AS SEVERAL
STRATEGIC AREAS NEAR THE CAPITAL
CITY OF KABUL.
THIS FROM THE NEW YORK TIMES.
THE NEWSPAPER SAYS THE TALIBAN
HAS MOVED BEYOND ITS TRADITIONAL
STRONGHOLDS IN RURAL AREAS AND
NOW CONTROLS TERRITORY NEAR
CRUCIAL HIGHWAYS CLOSE TO KABUL
AND IN OTHER STRATEGIC
PROVINCES.
THE NEWSPAPER SAYS THE RECENT
GAINS CAST DOUBT ON THE AFGHAN
ARMY'S ABILITY TO STAVE OFF THE
INSURGENTS AFTER NATO FORCES
LEAVE.
MORE TROUBLING NEWS ABOUT THAT
EBOLA OUTBREAK IN WEST AFRICA
THAT HAS KILLED APPROXIMATELY
670 PEOPLE.
ONE OF LIBERIA'S TOP DOCTORS WHO
HAS BEEN TREATING THE DISEASE
HAS DIED OF IT.
AND AN AMERICAN DOCTOR THERE HAS
ALSO BEEN INFECTED AND IS
RECEIVING INTENSIVE MEDICAL
TREATMENT.
HE IS SAID TO BE IN STABLE
CONDITION.
AND FROM GENOA, ITALY TONIGHT
PICTURES OF THE SHIPWRECKED
COSTA CONCORDIA AFTER TUGBOATS
PULLED IT INTO PORT.
THE CRUISE SHIP, WHICH RAN
AGROUND IN JANUARY OF 2012,
KILLING 32 PEOPLE, WILL BE SOLD
AS SCRAP AFTER A FINAL SEARCH
FOR THE LAST MISSING VICTIM-- A
33-YEAR-OLD WAITER.
NISSAN IS RECALLING ANOTHER 226
THOUSAND VEHICLES FOR THE MODEL
YEARS 2002 THROUGH 2004 BECAUSE
OF FAULTY AIRBAGS THAT COULD
CAUSE INJURY IN AN ACCIDENT.
IT'S PART OF A MUCH LARGER
RECALL BY CAR MANUFACTURERS WHO
USE THE SAME AIRBAG SUPPLIER.
FOR A LIST OF THE NISSAN MODELS
AFFECTED BY THE LATEST RECALL,
VISIT NEWSHOUR.PBS.ORG.
AIRLINES HAVE BEEN FINED NEARLY
21 MILLION DOLLARS DURING THE
PAST THREE YEARS FOR VIOLATING
THE PASSENGER BILL OF RIGHTS.
THIS ACCORDING TO DEPARTMENT OF
TRANSPORTATION RECORDS OBTAINED
BY THE LOS ANGELES TIMES.
THE NEWSPAPER SAID MOST OF THE
FINES ARE FOR UNFAIR AND
DECEPTIVE PRACTICES, LIKE
ADVERTISING FARES THAT DON'T
REALLY EXIST.
THE STEEPEST FINES WERE FOR
UNFAIR TREATMENT OF THE
DISABLED.
AND IN WYOMING, A CAVE THAT'S
BELIEVED TO CONTAIN THE REMAINS
OF THOUSANDS OF ANCIENT ANIMALS
WILL BE OPENED TO AN
INTERNATIONAL TEAM OF
SCIENTISTS TOMORROW.
THE CAVE IN NORTH CENTRAL
WYOMING IS THOUGHT TO CONTAIN
FOSSILS OF SEVERAL LONG-EXTINCT
CREATURES, INCLUDING MAMMOTHS
AND SHORT-FACED BEARS THAT STOOD
10 FEET TALL WHEN UP ON THEIR
HIND LEGS.
THE CAVE IS 85 FEET DEEP AND
MANY OF THE ANIMALS ARE BELIEVED
TO HAVE PLUNGED TO THEIR DEATHS.
THE SCIENTISTS WILL NEED TO USE
ROPES TO RAPPEL IN AND OUT.
THEY HOPE TO RECOVER DNA FROM
THE BONE FRAGMENTS.
AND NOW TO OUR SIGNATURE
SEGMENT.
TONIGHT, WE EXAMINE THE HEALTH
OF OUR OCEANS AND ITS IMPACT ON
THE GLOBAL FOOD SUPPLY.
ESTIMATES ARE THAT AT LEAST 15
PERCENT OF PEOPLE AROUND THE
WORLD-- THAT'S A BILLION PEOPLE-
- DEPEND ON FISH AS THEIR MAIN
SOURCE OF PROTEIN.
BUT SEVERAL SPECIES ARE NOW
THREATENED BY OVERFISHING.
RECENTLY, THE PRESIDENT OF THE
TINY PACIFIC ISLAND NATION OF
KIRIBATI ANNOUNCED A PLAN TO TRY
TO HELP SAVE ONE OF THE WORLD'S
MOST WIDELY CONSUMED TYPE OF
FISH-- TUNA.
NEWSHOUR CORRESPONDENT WILLIAM
BRANGHAM REPORTS ABOUT THE PLAN
AND LATER SAT DOWN WITH THE
PRESIDENT OF KIRIBATI TO DISCUSS
THE PROPOSAL.
>> Reporter: THE U.S.
STATE DEPARTMENT RECENTLY
CONVENED ITS FIRST OCEANS
CONFERENCE, BRINGING SCIENTISTS
AND POLITICAL LEADERS FROM
AROUND THE WORLD TO ADDRESS THE
MANY THREATS TO THE WORLD'S
OCEANS INCLUDING POLLUTION,
CLIMATE CHANGE, AND OVERFISHING.
>> THE PROTECTION OF OUR OCEANS
IS A VITAL INTERNATIONAL
SECURITY ISSUE.
>> Reporter: SECRETARY OF STATE
JOHN KERRY SAID THAT PROTECTING
THE OCEANS WAS AN OBVIOUS
CONCERN BOTH FOR THE U.S., AND
FOR ALL NATIONS.
>> PROTECTING OUR OCEAN IS ALSO
A GREAT NECESSITY FOR GLOBAL
FOOD SECURITY.
THE CONNECTION BETWEEN A HEALTHY
OCEAN AND LIFE ITSELF FOR EVERY
SINGLE PERSON ON EARTH CANNOT BE
OVERSTATED.
>> Reporter: KERRY THEN
INTRODUCED PRESIDENT ANOTE TONG,
OF THE PACIFIC ISLAND NATION OF
KIRIBATI, A MAN KERRY CALLED
"ONE OF THE WORLD'S GREATEST
ADVOCATES FOR THE WORLD'S
OCEANS"
TONG'S COUNTRY IS NEARLY SEVEN
THOUSAND MILES AWAY-- FAR OUT IN
THE MIDDLE OF THE PACIFIC OCEAN.
YOU MAY HAVE HEARD OF KIRIBATI
BECAUSE IT'S APPROXIMATELY
100,00 RESIDENTS ARE EXTREMELY
VULNERABLE TO SEA-LEVEL RISE
CAUSED BY CLIMATE CHANGE.
IN FACT, KIRIBATI RECENTLY
PURCHASED LAND IN FIJI AS A
REFUGE FOR ITS PEOPLE IN
ANTICIPATION OF WHEN RISING SEAS
MAY MAKE IT TOO DANGEROUS TO
CONTINUE LIVING HERE.
BUT PRESIDENT TONG'S MOST RECENT
CONCERN HAS BEEN OVERFISHING.
HE'S WORKING WITH THE
ENVIRONMENTAL GROUP CONSERVATION
INTERNATIONAL TO PROTECT THE
MARINE LIFE THAT LIVES ALONG THE
RICH CORAL REEFS THAT RING HIS
COUNTRY'S ISLANDS.
THE AREA IS HOME TO A HUGE ARRAY
OF SPECIES, MOST IMPORTANTLY
TUNA.
TONG WENT TO THAT STATE
DEPARTMENT CONFERENCE TO
ANNOUNCE THAT IN ORDER TO
PROTECT THOSE TUNA, HE WAS
BANNING COMMERCIAL FISHING IN
WHAT'S CALLED "THE PHOENIX
ISLANDS PROTECTED AREA."
IT'S OVER 150,000 SQUARE MILES
OF KIRIBATI'S TERRITORIAL
WATERS-- AN AREA ROUGHLY THE
SIZE OF CALIFORNIA.
SOME CRITICS CLAIM KIRIBATI HAS
PROMISED TO CLOSE THESE WATERS
BEFORE BUT ONLY CLOSED A SMALL
PORTION.
BUT PRESIDENT TONG SAYS SOON
THE ENTIRE AREA WILL BE
PROTECTED.
>> KIRIBATI HAS TAKEN THE
DECISION TO FULLY CLOSE ALL
COMMERCIAL FISHING ACTIVITIES
WITHIN THE PHOENIX ISLANDS
PROTECTED AREA WITH THE EFFECT
FROM THE FIRST OF JANUARY 2015.
>> Reporter: BECAUSE OF
OVERFISHING, MANY OF THE WORLDS
TUNA STOCKS ARE DEPLETED OR IN
JEOPARDY.
THE TUNA THAT COME FROM THE
CENTRAL PACIFIC ARE NOW ONE OF
THE LAST REMAINING RELATIVELY
HEALTHY STOCKS OF THIS
LUCRATIVE, CRUCIAL FISH.
TUNA ARE KNOWN AS A PELAGIC
SPECIES-- WHICH MEANS THEY
MIGRATE HUGE DISTANCES ACROSS
THE PACIFIC DURING THEIR
LIFESPAN.
SO WHILE KIRIBATI'S CLOSURE
PROTECTS JUST ONE SMALL PART OF
THE TUNA HABITAT, IT'S
CONSIDERED AN IMPORTANT-- IF
SYMBOLIC-- STEP IN PROTECTING
THE ENTIRE FISHERY.
I TALKED WITH PRESIDENT TONG THE
DAY BEFORE HE ANNOUNCED THE
CLOSURE.
>> Reporter: PRESIDENT TONG, WHY
DID YOU DECIDE THAT THIS WAS THE
RIGHT TIME TO CLOSE THESE
FISHING GROUNDS?
>> FOR FAR TOO OFTEN IN THE
PAST, WE STAND BY AND WATCH WHAT
GOES ON.
AND WE HAVE THEORIES, WE
POSTULATE THEORIES AS TO HOW TO
DEAL WITH IT, BUT I THINK WE
WANT TO DO MORE THAN THAT.
I THINK IT'S THE SAME CASE IN
TERMS OF CLIMATE CHANGE.
I THINK WE KNOW WHAT'S WRONG, WE
BELIEVE WE KNOW WHAT SHOULD BE
DONE, BUT WE CONTINUE NOT TO DO
IT.
WE CONTINUE TO WAIT FOR THE NEXT
COUNTRY TO DO IT.
AND DEFINITELY THE CASE IS THAT
MANY AMERICANS EAT TUNA, EITHER
SASHIMI OR CANNED, BUT WHAT WE
SEE ON THE TABLE, WHAT WE SEE
AROUND OUR DAILY LIVES, WE DON'T
ALWAYS ASSOCIATE IT WITH
SOMETHING ELSE BEYOND.
BUT THE REALITY IS THAT THIS HAS
TO COME FROM SOMEWHERE.
AND AT THE MOMENT THE MOST
VIABLE TUNA FISHING GROUNDS THAT
REMAIN VIABLE ARE THOSE IN THE
WESTERN AND CENTRAL PACIFIC, IN
OUR WATERS.
AND SO LEADERSHIP HAS GOT TO BE
TAKEN.
>> Reporter: HOW WILL THIS BE
ENFORCED THOUGH?
AS YOU KNOW, THERE ARE MANY
PROTECTED MARINE FISHERIES
AROUND THE WORLD WHERE ILLEGAL
FISHING IS STILL RAMPANT.
SO HOW WILL KIRIBATI, WITH
REALLY NO NAVY AND FEW RESOURCES
BE ABLE TO PROTECT THIS
PROTECTED AREA?
>> WE DO HAVE MEASURES IN PLACE
AND WE DO HAVE AGREEMENTS IN
PLACE WHERE WE HAVE AGREED TO
LOOK AFTER EACH OTHER'S
EXCLUSIVE ZONE, PARTICULARLY
FROM ILLEGAL ACTIVITIES.
WE ALSO HAVE ARRANGEMENTS WITH
OUR DEVELOPED PARTNERS INCLUDING
THE UNITED STATES, WHEREBY THE
U.S. COAST GUARD VESSELS GO INTO
OUR WATERS AND THEY DO PROVIDE
SURVEILLANCE AND THEY HAVE IN
THE PAST ACTUALLY CAUGHT AND WE
HAVE PROSECUTED ILLEGAL FISHING
VESSELS.
BUT I BELIEVE THAT IT'S GOT TO
BE DONE AS A COLLABORATIVE
EFFORT.
WE CANNOT DO IT ALONE; WE
SHOULD NOT HAVE TO DO IT ALONE,
BECAUSE WE ARE DOING THIS FOR
THE REST OF HUMANITY AS A FOOD
SECURITY ISSUE, GLOBAL FOOD
SECURITY ISSUE.
AND SO OUR PARTNERS, OUR
NEIGHBORS SHOULD BE WILLING, IF
THEY ARE ABLE, TO CONTRIBUTE.
>> Reporter: AS YOU KNOW, TUNA
SPEND-- THEY CROSS AN ENORMOUS
AMOUNT OF THE PACIFIC OCEAN, AND
SO WHILE YOU MAY BE ABLE TO
PROTECT THEM IN THE SHORT TIME
WHEN THEY ARE IN YOUR WATERS,
ISN'T THERE A CONCERN THAT
THEY'RE EVENTUALLY GOING TO
MIGRATE SOMEWHERE ELSE AND MIGHT
BE UNPROTECTED AND SNATCHED UP
ONCE THEY'VE LEFT YOUR
NEIGHBORHOOD?
>> THERE'S NO DOUBT THAT THIS
IS, THE TUNA ARE RENOWNED FOR
BEING A PELAGIC SPECIES.
THAT'S ABSOLUTELY CORRECT.
BUT AT LEAST SOMEWHERE WHERE
THEY KNOW THAT, WE'LL WE KNOW
THAT THEY WILL BE ABLE TO FIND
REFUGE.
I HOPE THE TUNA LEARN THAT IN
TIME, BUT I THINK IT'S BETTER
THAN DOING NOTHING AT ALL.
AND HOPEFULLY BY DOING THIS,
OTHER NEIGHBORING COUNTRIES WILL
DO THE SAME AND SO ON.
HOPEFULLY IN TIME WE WILL HAVE
SOMETHING MUCH MORE EFFECTIVE TO
ENSURE THAT THE TUNA FISHERIES
IN OUR PART OF THE WORLD DOESN'T
SUFFER THE SAME FATE AS OTHER
TUNA, FISHERIES IN DIFFERENT
PARTS OF THE WORLD IN THE
ATLANTIC, THE SALMON, THE COD
AND WHATEVER, THE BLUEFIN IN THE
ATLANTIC, THAT'S ALL GONE.
WE DON'T WANT TO REPEAT THE SAME
EXPERIENCE.
>> Reporter: YOU'VE OBVIOUSLY
SPENT A GREAT DEAL OF YOUR TIME
TRYING TO DRAW THE WORLD'S
ATTENTION TO CLIMATE CHANGE AND
TO SEA-LEVEL RISE AND TO THE
VERY REAL THREAT TO YOUR NATION.
IS THERE A CONCERN THAT, AS SEA
LEVELS CONTINUE TO RISE AND THE
TERRITORIAL SIZE OF YOUR OWN
COUNTRY IS THREATENED, THAT IT
BECOMES HARDER AND HARDER TO
PROTECT THE FISHERIES AROUND
THEM?
>> WELL, A LOT OF THINGS ARE
GOING TO NEED PROTECTING, AND I
THINK THE FIRST ANIMALS THAT
WOULD NEED PROTECTING ARE OUR
PEOPLE, OKAY? SECONDLY, OF
COURSE THE QUESTION THAT ARISES
AS TO WHAT HAPPENS TO OUR
EXCLUSIVE ECONOMIC ZONE.
DOES IT DISAPPEAR WITH THE
SUBMERGENCE OF OUR ISLANDS?
WE BELIEVE NOT.
I'VE LOOKED AND I'VE BEEN
SEEKING ADVICE ON THIS, AND
THERE'S NO LEGAL PRECEDENT.
IN OTHER WORDS...
>> Reporter: IF A NATION GOES
UNDER THE WATER, DOES IT STILL
HAVE JURISDICTION AROUND IT.
>> DEFINITELY.
WE BELIEVE THAT IT IS OURS, IT
REMAINS OURS.
WHETHER OUR ISLANDS GO
UNDERWATER OR NOT.
BUT OF COURSE LET ME MAKE THE
POINT THAT WE ARE COMMITTED TO
ENSURING THAT WHATEVER HAPPENS,
WHATEVER THE SEA LEVEL RISE
MIGHT BE, WE WILL BUILD THEM UP
SO THAT TO ENSURE THAT OUR
NATION CONTINUES TO EXIST, EVEN
IF ONLY A SMALL PIECE OF IT.
BECAUSE IT'S SYMBOLIC.
IT'S A STATEMENT TO EVERYBODY
NOT TO ALLOW THINGS LIKE THAT TO
HAPPEN.
>> Reporter: PRESIDENT ANOTE
TONG OF KIRIBATI, THANK YOU VERY
MUCH.
>> YOU'RE VERY WELCOME AND THANK
YOU FOR GIVING ME THIS
OPPORTUNITY TO COMMENT ON THIS
VERY SIGNIFICANT CHALLENGE.
>> THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR
WEEKEND SUNDAY.
AND NOW VIEW EVER-- VIEWERS
LIKE YOU.
YOUR FEEDBACK ABOUT SOME OF
OUR RECENT WORK.
OUR SIGNATURE STORY LAST
SUNDAY ABOUT WEB-BASED
INCENTIVE PROGRAMS DEVISED
BY BEHAVIORAL ECONOMISTS AND
USED BY BIG FINANCIAL
INSTITUTIONS TO TRY TO BOOST
SAVINGS PROMPTED MANY
SKEPTICAL COMMENTS.
PANAYIOTIS WROTE US ON
FACEBOOK:
ANTHONY, WHO WROTE US ON OUR
WEBSITE, ADDED THIS:
BUT MOST OF THE RESPONSES
WE GOT EXPRESSED DISTRUST OF,
EVEN DISDAIN FOR BANKS AND
OTHER BIG FINANCIAL
INSTITUTIONS.
DEBORAH WROTE US ON FACEBOOK:
AND WE HEARD THIS FROM MARIE
DIXON:
OTHERS COMMENTED ON THE
DIFFICULTY OF SAVING IN THE
FIRST PLACE.
A PERSON IDENTIFIED AS RANSOM
O'SHIELDS WROTE:
MK ADDED THIS:
AND PETER PIPER SHARED A SIMILAR
VIEW ON FACEBOOK:
AS ALWAYS, LET US KNOW WHAT
YOU THINK OF OUR STORIES ON
TWITTER, FACEBOOK OR AT
NEWSHOUR.PBS.ORG.
SOME LATE NEWS BEFORE WE
LEAVE YOU TONIGHT.
DURING A PHONE CALL TODAY
WITH ISRAELI PRIME MINISTER
BENJAMIN NETANYAHU, THE
WHITE HOUSE SAYS PRESIDENT
OBAMA EXPRESSED SERIOUS AND
GROWING CONCERN ABOUT
CASUALTIES ON BOTH SIDES
FROM ISRAEL'S CONFLICT WITH
HAMAS.
THE PRESIDENT SAID ANY
LASTING SOLUTION WOULD REQUIRE
THE DEMILITARIZATION OF GAZA.
AND AN AIDE TO PALESTINIAN
AUTHORITY PRESIDENT ABBAS
SAID A PALESTINIAN DELEGATION
IS HEADING TO CAIRO TO TRY TO
NEGOTIATE A NEW CEASEFIRE.
JOIN US ON AIR AND ONLINE
TOMORROW ON THE NEWSHOUR.
PAUL SOLOMON EXPLORES WHICH
MIGHT BE A BETTER ECONOMIC
ENGINE: MORE MONEY FOR THE RICH
OR HIGHER WAGES FOR THE WORKING
CLASS.
THAT'S IT FOR THIS EDITION OF
PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND, I'M
HARI SREENIVASAN, THANKS FOR
WATCHING.